there's more people that we can meet
through social media write follow and
learn from sounds amazing but i think
also in those two things right we we are
getting a little bit pulled away and it
in fact is hurting our sleep
which eventually actually hurts our
productivity in the long run you don't
get stronger in the gym you get stronger
actually out of the gym in the gym
you're actually getting weaker right
you're breaking that muscle down
right it's that recovery process right
that actually happens it allows the
muscle to grow stronger and take a more
continued load if i could give you a
pill
and this pill would improve your memory
right
help you live longer and fight off
cancer reduce your blood pressure
increase the quality of your skin in
your hair and how you look
um
you know also your testosterone
production or your muscle repair who
wouldn't want to take that pill everyone
would right and that pill is sleep right
yet
45 of us get less than six hours a night
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is harpreet ry he's a
former investment banker turned
entrepreneur who is the ceo of aura ring
a sleep tracking company that is doing
its best to help us all live our best
lives and harpreet what i want to know
about is why exactly does sleep matter
it's a loaded question
a great way to start um
i think sleep matters for
a bunch of different reasons i think
sean stevenson said it really really
well you know to your overall well-being
and your health and your performance
sleep probably does have a greater
impact than both diet and activity
combined um you know but the reality of
it we all know it when we get a bad
night of sleep we feel like crap
right we're not productive we're sort of
grouchy to the people around us can't
perform well in the gym
right and oftentimes just have low
energy
so there's a whole host of reasons on
the health side
but also just literally how you feel and
how you know how you feel about life and
your mood
a lot of that has to actually come comes
back to comes back to sleep
if you had to push beyond what we
know because i know people are super
tense about what i'm about to ask you if
you had to push beyond what you know and
went into
um hypothesis or what you suspect
what is it exactly that you think is
happening when we sleep like sure so we
know that the brain is like cleaning out
things
but what what else is going on i think
if you and one way i like to think about
it is you know your body actually is
operating you know mainly because of the
release of certain hormones at certain
periods of time and a lot of that is
governed by something called like a
central clock right um to your body
right so we call that that kind of
science circadian biology and it's a
relatively new science so as you pointed
out there's not a lot we know but if you
want to think about actually hey what
time do i get tired and then when i get
tired and i go to bed what's actually
happening why are certain fluids moving
through my brain and removing toxins
right why are actually memories
throughout the day being sped up at
three times the speed during rem sleep
to help you learn
why is certain hormones being released
to actually bring your heart rate and
your blood pressure down
you know probably for you to recover a
bit right and why is more testosterone
and growth hormone released all these
things are happening because of this
master clock right and sleep is actually
one of the governing factors that sets
the time
for all those things to happen and for
the next day as well so you know i think
if i were to theorize that having
disrupted sleep or starting this clock
or your engine you know if you want to
think about that at different times or
fragmented times doesn't allow your body
and your mind to recover and function
the way it should to lead you know a
normal life or you know a great life
where you can achieve your potential
yeah so
one thing like in today's society where
and i'm certainly somebody who talks a
lot about this like working your ass off
grinding hard like really pushing um
part of the reason that i'm so into
talking about sleep and i want people to
really understand how powerful it is is
i worry that people think when i say
that that i'm saying sleep doesn't
matter and when in fact i'll say that
it's probably from an experiential
standpoint is one of the most important
things from a cognitive optimization
standpoint yeah um what drew you to
sleep and like what's the background
with the investment banking and all that
stuff i think it's pretty interesting
yeah i mean i would say i was always
interested in technology that was
probably like a passion of mine along
with performance so i did study
electrical engineering in college and
worked on actually a lot of the sensors
that go in these type of devices
i got distracted
as most people do in life and i decided
to go into finance really because i had
a lot of debt and i thought it was a
cool thing to do right and um i guess
what i just experienced firsthand was in
my first year of investment banking
i came in weighing about 140 pounds and
i'm like five five on a good day maybe
five six with my turbine but like you
know i went from 140 pounds to about 185
and about yeah and about 50 weeks so
almost a pound a week and i actually
even back in college was probably like
more health conscious than what i ate
right didn't really drink that much you
know was actually eating a lot of plants
my parents were vegetarian grew up
vegetarian and my diet didn't really
change a lot and so i'm sitting there
thinking
well i'm basically eating the same in
fact i'm eating less
right i'm not moving around much so yeah
i'm not working out but i'm eating less
why am i gaining a pound every week and
that's actually when i started to
realize like well okay i'm gaining a lot
of weight i'm actually losing hair you
know you can't see it which is great but
um i'm losing hair right and you know my
skin is actually starting to look
grayish like i literally had friends who
i hadn't seen from college see them
after the year and they're like
like dude we know you've got a great job
at you know on wall street but like
looks like you've gained 40 50 pounds
and like you look like crap
so um that's when i started actually
just researching a lot and learning
about sleep
i just started to like remember
forgetting things and that never
happened to me um so i just the more and
more i learned about you know the issues
you know the correlations with lack of
sleep and weight gain and you know same
thing with skin and how you look and
also how you feel um it became obvious
to me how how important sleep was just
from experiencing it right so what what
is some of the the biological disruption
that happens when we don't get sleep
like i know that there's um some pretty
crazy um like if you're just looking at
somebody's data and they had a bad
night's sleep in terms of them looking
like a pre-diabetic from their insulin
response levels um what else is going on
at a biological level that that sleep
affects so
um you know there's tons of studies out
there not just one but literally
probably close to 100 showing that the
lack of sleep is associated with
elevated glucose levels
i think that happens for a series of
reasons
there's two hormones that you know we
know today are pretty popular in
controlling your appetite and also how
full you feel after you eat those are
ghrelin you know controlling your hunger
hormone right like how hungry do you get
how hungry do you feel and then leptin
right how satiated are you after you eat
how full do you feel
and so i think one of the studies that
was done showed that basically um a four
hour versus eight hour night and you
know it was almost like your your leptin
levels right went down by 50 so even
after you eat you still feel hungry and
then your greenland levels right are
actually you know shooting up so you
feel hungrier you eat and you feel you
know less full and um you know i think
probably the reasons that's happened in
the past is if you if you think about
the times maybe you know historically in
a paleo-era paleolithic area where we
were probably operating in very little
sleep they were probably under extreme
conditions maybe we were being hunted
maybe we were hunting right um and so i
think some of that was designed and this
is designed for your body to happen that
hey under periods of stress like you're
looking for food more you're trying to
eat more store more right but in today's
world and society right those those same
conditions of less sleep you know aren't
aren't applied right in the same way so
it might have been designed for a good
reason but but in fact now is probably
hurting us
going back to that first year in
investment banking and thinking about
the modern context when we're not
getting sleep um
i know that while i'm a huge proponent
of sleep there have been times where my
aura ring has told me off for not
getting enough sleep sure um and
i'll say that 20 of the time i'm
knowingly
reducing my amount of sleep and how do
you think about that as as the ceo of a
you know sleep betterment company yeah
are there times where you'll
intentionally not get sleep because
there's a bigger priority of course like
goals versus sleep where do you fall on
that i think there's definitely periods
that we all will have to go without
getting enough sleep right i think
that's inevitable um the question is how
do we make people more aware of it and
more conscious of it right and how do we
also then
once that awareness and consciousness
happens choose to act on it even while
on wall street um i ended up going from
an investment you know i was at morgan
stanley for a year an investment banking
group i ended up going to hedge fund for
nine years and i still worked really
hard there got more sleep luckily but
there it used to be hey i want to work
out i want to get fit
so i'd wake up at you know 4 45 to be in
the gym by 5 15. so i often battled okay
you know
getting enough sleep to work out right
and that probably actually led to a lot
of injuries for me over the years i also
think it's about you know social
activities with friends you know it's
natural to want to spend time with
people and oftentimes you know
everyone's sort of sacrificing their
schedule a little bit to do it i think
if you have families or loved ones that
can be another area where like hey you
got to take the kids to an event or you
got to take them out to a party and they
may throw your schedule off but the big
one i do think is work um i think it's
there's a lot of people you know
probably a lot of your audience right
even even me like we want to kick butt
right we want to get in we want to work
hard as the ceo of a company a sleep
company i'm like do i want those guys
sleeping an hour less and working on
this to get it out on time or you know
there's always a balance and
i think you know we're not going to be
able to i would say change people's
lives and you know not say prioritize
those projects or not but we want to
make people more aware of it and that
they can see the impact when they are
choosing to do it and then frankly come
back and recover i'll have people now
that tell me hey man i still go on those
business trips where i am back to back
to back meeting right nine to nine
right and then like maybe i brush my
teeth and maybe i don't because i'm that
busy that night right but then when i
get back i see hey it takes me a week or
two to get back and recover and then i
take it a little bit easier i book less
meetings then right i tend to try to
actually get that extra hour of sleep
and i'm not saying that kind of behavior
is great but at least you become a
little bit more conscious and don't try
burning the candle you know on both ends
forever right um so i think it's um
there's a lot of things that have
happened that we have abundance
information right you know look at look
at google's mission statement right
organize the world's information and
provide access to it sign me up right i
wanna i wanna always be learning i want
access to information you know facebook
right like bring communities together
bring people together right there's more
people that we can meet through social
media write follow and learn from sounds
amazing but i think also in those two
things right we we are getting a little
bit pulled away and it in fact is
hurting our sleep um which eventually
actually hurts our productivity in the
long run
and what ways do you think that that
kind of stuff is hurting our sleep is it
just that we're allocating time to it or
is there a whole another host of
problems i think it's a much deeper than
just time let's take facebook as an
example
all right let's say you know when we
were all in high school and hung out in
one friend's basement right or you have
a couple friends over all right we're
hanging out we're shooting the [__]
right we're talking about whatever we're
catching up on you know some cute girl
in math class or sports or you know some
the new york knicks game that just
happened but think about it this way um
every 10 minutes the doorbell's ringing
you're hosting you're going up and
letting that person in making sure
they're comfortable making sure that
they have a drink right making sure that
they have a place to sit and hang out
with friends introducing other people
what if that happens
every 10 minutes not just for the first
hour
but for the next 12 hours right right
what happens to you
right what happens to everyone else in
the room
right like it's just think about that as
a human i'd be like man you never you
never even get a chance to see how you
feel you never get a chance to really
spend time with your friends right
you're constantly being bombarded so i
think i think that's part of it i think
the same could go true for google like i
love learning right i would say that's
like one thing i've always been
passionate about and why i like doing
different things but if every 10 minutes
something new pops up where like hey i
was learning about this i didn't get to
go that deep and understand it and
something else comes in like you're just
getting distracted and so i i literally
look at the numbers i'm a numbers guy
you know there's you touch your phone
the average person does about 150 times
a day right so if you're awake for 16
hours that's about 10 times every hour
that's you know once every six minutes
right so i think there's a deeper level
of hey there's some satisfaction just
like the buzz you get the party when you
say hello to someone that you haven't
seen in a while and you're excited but
that constant bombardment right is is
actually you know increasing anxiety
right it's
i don't think it's you know we have
abundant access to information in people
and i think that's great but also let's
you know look at some of the other
numbers depression all-time high suicide
rates all-time high
lack of sleep all-time high right
obesity all-time high and so i think
it's not just that you're spending the
time doing it i do think it's a little
bit in the way we were designed as
humans that's distracted us um and and i
think it's ultimately you know taking us
away from our being conscious and being
focused
what do you mean really fast what do you
mean that the way that we're designed as
humans is part of what distracts us so i
mean i don't i don't think as humans you
know when they look at some of the
network theories out there on the brain
and how it compartalize information you
know really more than 50 people in your
immediate circle like that you interact
with tends to be overloading but like
you know you have these different groups
right it might be immediate group family
and really close friends then maybe one
degree of separation and it may be
another host of work right but now that
that has 5x 10x 20x right
and i think like it becomes harder for
the human mind right and even just from
a social anxiety perspective whether you
have it or not to manage that as all
these networks grow so much
yeah when i think about
what really plays on people sleep
lifestyle definitely comes up
one thing that i think a lot about
and partly because i guess i am so like
it doesn't work for me is how many
people now smoke weed yeah and its
effect on rem sleep yeah so i've looked
at the oral ring stats of people that i
know smoke weed dude it's [__] crazy
yeah like their rem sleep is next to
nothing yeah um walk me through some
like what are the phases of sleep sure
and what are some like known lifestyle
stuff that people may not be thinking
about that have like that big impact
like weed does on our rem sleep sure
yeah i mean um sleep scientists aren't
that imaginative so they numbered the
stages of sleep um but i guess you know
aside from the numbers the way most
people now know them as sort of light
sleep you know rem sleep and deep sleep
and then the fourth stage you know let's
or one of the other stages being awake
so i'll focus on rem and deep um i think
there's been more research done there
and actually what happens so in in deep
sleep what we know is that this period
happens in the earlier part of the night
um it tends to be when more things are
related to your physical body right like
your testosterone and growth hormone are
mainly released during deep sleep your
muscle repair even your skin and
collagen repair is happening in deep
sleep rem sleep from what we know and a
lot of this is a very new science right
a lot more about memory consolidation
right um that that's actually when your
brain is playing things
you know at 3x to speed to help you
remember them you know by repetition how
do we know what's happening at 3x uh so
that's by looking at just fmris and
various other eeg type equipment
there's even some new work being done
and one of the things that they're
showing is if you can actually implant a
thought
during the early phases of sleep um you
know actually you can almost
potentially trick your brain to work on
it during rem sleep go on tell me more
what do you mean how do you implant the
idea there this is very very
experimental so i think the idea is hey
can you actually bring a thought either
through a visualization either through
an audio or you go to bed yeah or you're
saying in those immediate minutes while
you're falling asleep
yeah sort of like inception it's
starting to get pretty nuts out there
okay so finish that because this is so
interesting so
what have they done in the studies like
what matters is putting your headphones
on is it someone saying something to you
yeah this is super experimental like
nothing's been published yet they just
had a conference all about this like
basically
helping people dream and have certain
thoughts during rhyme sleep that can
help them solve problems
in in their lives um so some really cool
work but um yeah i wish i wish i knew
more but it's literally happening as we
speak
um
but getting back to sort of like why
these things are happening and what you
know so you know deep sleep your
physical body being restored right
rem sleep think about your mind and your
memories and your consolidation now we
also know deep sleep has some other some
other things are happening there that
are also related to your brain so um i
think actually matthew walker talked
about this he runs berkeley sleep lab
that
there's certain proteins and you know
inflammation that's actually cleared
away um at certain periods during deep
sleep high prevalence of that plaque has
been shown to correlate with alzheimer's
and early alzheimer's so during deep
sleep it turns out that actually certain
types of these fluids right are actually
clearing your clearing your your brain
which is pretty cool so there's a lot
we're still learning about the different
stages of sleep there's certain things
that help or hurt the different stages
i would say excess use of of you know
cannabis or alcohol
definitely hurt sleep across all stages
um i have seen actually though on the
other side specifically with cannabis
that certain types whether it's cbd and
actually cbn that actually have been
shown in small amounts to actually help
improve sleep um so i think you know
there is different stages or it improves
one stage it looks like
it helps people hey just fall asleep and
stay asleep so some people that may have
you know trouble falling asleep which is
almost
greater than 15 of the population now
whoa
yeah and then also helps with
specifically deep sleep from you know
but this is early research again hard to
do just because of the rules with
cannabis today and you know doing
academic or medical research um
you know some of the things we see
though from our data is being consistent
in time
helps your body gets used to that clock
that circadian clock and you know that
master clock that's governing everything
so then you start if you go to bed at a
certain time you end up waking up at the
same time even without an alarm like
yourself um
that's one big thing i think timing of
food happens to be another dude i will
tell you from my wife's experience who
has had massive microbiome issues yeah i
totally discounted food timing i was
like my entire life i'll eat
then go right to bed and never once
thought about it so when people first
started saying that i was like yeah yeah
whatever like there's no way it's that
impactful it's impactful i mean your
vagus nervous connection to your brain
and your stomach
and so if you think about those first
few hours of digestion that happen in
your uh happen you know when you eat
it's sort of hard for your vagus nerve
to relax
right
right during those first few hours so if
you just eat an hour or two before you
go to bed like your brain is actually
not going to be really relaxing and so
hard to get actually a lot of deep sleep
so we that's one of the biggest
hacks we've seen sort of people uh
change right and see an immediate impact
in their data
i would say also you know timing of
caffeine so trying to get your caffeine
in you know almost like more than 12
hours before you go to bed
um so i think that's another big one
just given the half-life of caffeine and
now not everyone's sensitive caffeine
but i would say 80 of the population is
um and then also getting enough sunlight
you know we sit a lot indoors like right
like we're and and that affects us at
certain points at night if we're looking
at our screens looking at a blue screen
right that that doesn't help us produce
melatonin the way we used to but also
the opposite's true just getting light
exposure during the day right lets your
brain know hey it's daytime and you're
alive right and you should start
releasing these hormones um and so i
think that's that's another big thing
that probably would help a lot of people
it's really interesting what do you
think about blue blockers i think blue
blockers are excellent um i think all
day or just at night uh so
if you look at sort of the reason as to
what happens you know when sun goes down
there's no longer any blue light out
there and so that's actually signal to
your brain to start producing melatonin
which helps you feel drowsy which helps
you go to bed and so if you have
exposure to that blue light at night
your brain doesn't get the same reaction
to release that melatonin and so i as a
result i would say hey when the sun goes
down you know put on those blue light
blockers
some people i think if you're under
certain light conditions like you know
which most people unfortunately are with
certain types of fluorescent light or
really close work into a screen you may
want to try a blue blocker during the
day as well but we've seen that have a
huge impact on our users data
so if we were going to optimize the [__]
out of our sleep and we were going to
become like olympic level sleepers get
the most recovery which is something
that we should definitely talk more
about yeah um
what what's like that optimal forget
that i have a job forget i have a life
outside of sleeping just like yeah my
job in life your job is to optimize
sleep yeah what would i do um so
start me i wake up now uh you wake up
and let's get the consistent time of
waking up okay right so get that
exposure to
sun and light in the morning immediately
and within the first hour what if i wake
up like i wake up typically two to three
hours before the sun comes up
is that actually bad should i be trying
to change my sleep cycle no there's
probably still ambient light out there
from the sun even though you can't
directly see it interesting so just so
go outside even if it's dark i would say
especially as the sun starts to rise
okay it'll be more so at sunrise i'm
going outside get some sun exposure
stand there lay there walk run doesn't
matter
just any exposure your skin's gonna like
whether you walk whether you sit what if
i'm clothed do i need to am i standing
out naked no matter what i mean i would
say the less clothes the science would
say the better but at the same time i
think a lot of it is you know built into
sort of your face and specifically right
your glands behind the eyes so i think
just getting exposure to your eyes is
really important as well okay so get
some sunlight how much sunlight should i
get so the sun is rising i sat for an
hour uh i would say at least this is my
job this is your job as much as you can
if this is your job so i should be
outside literally
i'm assuming in the shade to not burn
but out in the sun as much as i can on
the sun as much as you can okay um i
would say second if you're gonna have
caffeine
um have it within those first do my job
should i avoid caffeine
um
i'm not going to tell people to avoid
caffeine because i think most people
won't i also think coffee tastes
phenomenal and there's also antioxidants
in coffee so i'm actually you know a
believer of everything in moderation but
have that first cup or second cup you
know greater than if i can if it's your
job you know
14 hours before you go to sleep okay so
within those first two hours of waking
um i would say next after that getting
exercise specifically getting exercise
earlier in the day um and you know not
in the late afternoon will help seven
days a week
this is an exercise that's an exercise
conversation not a sleep conversation i
think um there are certain days you want
to go hard and certain days are going to
want to go light okay i think the
problem is most people go hard all the
time right which doesn't help either
light activity especially can help
improve sleep and not to complicate this
and i don't want to get distracted from
our optimization
conversation but so
knowing when to work out i know is one
of the things you guys talk about in the
app so the
heart rate variability is that going to
be my ideal thing to look at to know
whether i should be working out or is
there something else i should pay
attention to um i would say in terms of
like when to work out you know the best
way we tell people to do is try
different things and then see what
happens to your data like i used to play
a lot of soccer growing up
whenever we had away games i never knew
why the next day i was so tired so
normally because the game was later and
i got home later and i slept later and
even if i got seven or eight hours of
sleep i still felt like [__] because of
the timing because the timing was thrown
off right and also most likely because
like your body gets all jacked up
playing under the lights right right
before you go to bed um so that yeah
that would affect that that definitely
affected it a lot so i think ideally
what we've seen is some people have
rhythms where they want to work out you
know early in the morning which is fine
other people tends to be sort of right
after that afternoon lull so you know
not seven i would say generally not
seven or eight that's typically too late
but if you want to think about from like
four to six that might be more ideal but
better yet what we've seen from our data
as people who
work out earlier tend to sleep better so
even in those first call it you know
five hours to six hours of waking up if
you can fit into your schedule right but
just really fast on the the data point
so
what do i look at
that would tell me whether today is like
a day to go hard in the gym or a day to
take it easy or even not work out what
actual data what data so we we actually
have come up with a score called a
readiness score and that's based on
that's based on actually your rolling
two-week average of both your sleep and
your activity so if your heart rate is
really elevated at night that'll
actually impact your readiness score the
next day interesting so there's a bunch
of different factors in the app and you
can click on each one and actually see
it um so the time of your resting heart
rate like how when that happened that
lowest curve happened and the absolute
value is something that'll affect it and
that's impacted by when you work out and
when you eat
you know we also look at respiration
rate as well throughout the night as
another indicator but i would say it's a
combination of like your rolling sleep
average right plus some of your heart
rate and physiological data
and your general activity balance that
will tell you to like work out hard or
not so if you're pretty sedentary and
all of a sudden you go work out quite a
bit
right that one day like you're gonna
feel tired the next day and you should
take it easy because your body's not
used to that load and you'll see that
reflected in the readiness score okay um
so that's what we've used and we've
created to help people sort of figure
out what day they should work out and
what day they should push hard i would
say generally some other things like
data within the data like that people
look at are the amount of deep sleep
to see like hey you know do i feel
physically really good right to actually
work out hard today and then also heart
rate variability what impacts deep sleep
so if weed is one of the things that can
really it is so pronounced and that's
why i keep harving on this in terms of
like you could compare my rem to
somebody who smokes weed yeah and it is
night and day the amount of rem that
they're getting right um so
what's something that impacts deep sleep
um i would say all these things we've
talked about they they impact both
stages so eating late will impact both
your deep and your rem smoking too much
marijuana will impact both your deep and
your ram right shifting off the timing
um of when you go to bed and you know
how punctual and regular that is will
impact your deepen ram so um i don't
know if there are certain things
specific to certain stages i do tend
from what we see people that have late
meals tend to impact the deep
sleep more than rem
but i don't think there's been a lot of
studies done yet with certain phases of
sleep and certain activities so if you
tend to be extremely athletic and work
out a lot we have seen those people
actually have more deep sleep so when we
we had some tour de france riders who
were willing to share their data you
know without revealing their names and
the teams and stuff like that and it was
phenomenal the amount of deep sleep they
got even in their like you know mid 30s
some of them even later i mean these
guys were getting two hours a night and
we'll often see that even in some of the
pro athletes as well and so i think you
know if you think about what's happening
during deep sleep all that muscle
reconstruction and repair growth hormone
release testosterone release your brain
is adjusting to what you need right um
on the other hand if you're super
creative you are focusing a lot on you
know maybe concepts type of work
artistic type work um you know maybe
even just you know guys thinking with
numbers all the time sitting behind a
desk trade in stocks um you know you
might see lower deep sleep and a higher
rem sleep so you know your brain because
of the lack of physical activity um and
also probably the more the more mental
load as well interesting yeah okay so
your brain is realizing that you
probably need to consolidate those
memories more right there's more to
remember there's more things you were
trying to learn during the day so you
know your brain your brain's pretty
smart
[Laughter]
yes okay so
um we got through exercise what are some
other things type of diet do we see that
there's any influence on sleep with that
i generally do think that heavy sugars
and
carbs late too much in access to bed can
really hurt you carb wise specifically
sugar-wise specifically interesting so
um and what data do you have like that
feels right to me but it just feels
right is there any data that backs that
up there's been a lot more studies on
food timing and sleep as far as the
actual particular macro contents of that
meal you know carbs protein fat haven't
seen that proteins and fats do take
longer to digest so you know in that
sense like as we talked about with the
vagus nerve in your digestion maybe
that's probably not helpful
if it's within a short amount of window
so if you were to eat something closer
to
bedtime you might be better off with
like a lighter
carbohydrate meal but not too much
sugars but you know not too much fat um
or you know or protein interesting um
but what makes you think and then that
it sugar plays a role in disrupting
sleep
well i would say most people tend to eat
desserts and when they eat desserts they
eat them late
right
and so the other thing we know also
about sugar is there tends to be a
pretty big correlation with sugar
consumption and heart rate variability
it lowers heart rate variability yes
that's so interesting why do we want
heart rate variability like i i get it
and i've heard it a million times but i
don't actually understand why that's
good so first of all i guess explain to
people what heart rate variability is
sure and then um giving some numbers i
think would be helpful i know you guys
are a little cagey about telling people
exactly what their numbers should be
sure but generally with heart rate
variability the higher the better the
higher the better okay
so what is heart rate variability your
first question um like the name says
it's the variability within your
heartbeats
so what does that mean
you and i are sitting here you know
let's say we're at 60 beats per minute
um every single beat on every second is
slightly different so maybe one beat
there is one second between the two
beats maybe the next one there's 1.1
maybe the next one there's 0.9 seconds
but over a minute it'll average to this
60 beats per minute right so high
variation tends to actually be a sign
it's counterintuitive of low stress
right so
yeah it is it is counter-intuitive right
versus if each beat is super succinct
tends to be you know individuals tend to
have like a lower hrv score which means
you're more of a sympathetic state
within your autonomic nervous system
meaning you you react quickly to your
surroundings
[Music]
yeah right exactly so you might you
might actually freeze um so versus if
you're if you're in a very fluid
movement if you think about it all of a
sudden you know uh i don't know a tiger
jumps out there right i think it would
be weird it would be weird right we'd be
freaking out right but someone who
probably has higher heart rate
variability that's more of a
parasympathetic state controlling
himself right would be like okay i'm
going to push tom away and run that way
right the tiger's there cool right like
but i'm gonna you know i might think on
my feet a little bit quicker i'll grab
this mug when i'm running away so i can
chuck it at the tiger's face not that
that will help um i would appreciate
that more than throwing me in front of
it but thank you but um you know someone
in a fluid state if you think about it
when you're fluid like something happens
and you're just able to shift around it
right but if you're if your heart rate
is like in that very in a mechanical
beat you almost you're like stressed
you're frozen so that comes and you just
like
like you're you're stiff right you're
not able to shift and so
um that's the best way i can sort of
describe it
it's super interesting
um okay so
how how does one drive their heart rate
variability higher sure um i think you
know a lot of the things we talked about
sleep tend to also help sleeping itself
will change your heart rate variability
most people will have higher hrv during
when they sleep versus during the day
there tends to be lots of micro stresses
during the day you know whether you have
two cups of coffee you have to go to the
bathroom it's a stressor you're in
traffic it's a stressor and actually
it's how you you know sort of your body
and your mind like accumulates all that
stress and reacts to it over the course
of the night so um sleep definitely like
you'll tend to see your hrv dip in the
early part of the night and go up
towards the morning
so meaning like you're recovering
throughout the night
so most people i would say what we do
know there's been a lot more research
done on meditation so
in the beginning actually bad meditators
are stressing out so their hrv tends to
go down but more experienced meditation
uh meditators um tend to actually raise
their hiv people stressing out if
they're bad at meditation i mean it's
like you want to focus on certain you
know not you want to focus on not you
know having all these thoughts come to
your head right so you tend to like try
to focus and think too hard almost and
you're like wait i shouldn't be having
that thought i shouldn't be having that
and it tends to be stressful um so i
think that's like what we've seen so we
we have a meditation mode coming out
soon that we have and i'm stoked on that
yeah so what are you guys looking for in
that in the meditation yeah like heart
rate variability we're looking at heart
rate we're also looking at actually
peripheral body temperature your core
and your periphery tends to be pretty
correlated at night
so we look at that you know change every
single night in in the aura ring but
actually even during meditating um very
good meditators and this has been
documented even with some like tibetan
monks are able to actually like
um
increase the circulation and the blood
flow and and actually have a positive
impact on their on their temperature
it's another metric that we will report
to people where you'll be able to track
uh your meditation you get bio feedback
in real time so that i could see what
i'm doing we're trying to do it after
the session um i think
you know one of those things you don't
want to be distracted during it
but we're going to play around with it
and we'll see what people want and how
they feel um but i do you know one of
the things we're looking at is doing
different types of modes of meditation
seeing if that has an impact on
different types of people you know
whether it's you know tm or vedic or
whatever it might be
so maybe mindfulness sessions right just
having self-gratitude and breathing
right over trying to focus on a specific
meditation type might be pretty
interesting so no we're excited to
release it we should have it out you
know i would say before the end of april
whoa yeah one thing i will say that i
was um
i was i was sad by
is that if i take a nap you can't tell
me if i like what my things were it just
shows up as rest yeah so without the
breakdown most people during naps first
of all you don't tend to go into rem and
deep sleep really yeah just light just
light that's that would say that's the
first reason um the second reason is um
whenever we you know when we created the
aura ring right and we what we actually
did is you know like all these other
devices do you go in a sleep lab you get
the full eeg equipment and you put some
your devices on them and you calibrate
the algorithms and so trying to do sleep
studies for naps is actually a lot
harder and there isn't a lot of
like good data on that versus overnight
sleep labs um so that's that's another
reason we are trying to make it more
apparent in the app that you are having
an app versus just that rest feature but
we're working on it and maybe even for
certain people
maybe getting back to your your question
of hey if we want to be professional
sleepers don't nap late right if you nap
late later in the day you know i would
say like after four or five you actually
end up hurting your sleep most often um
that night as well so i think if you do
look at some of the older cultures
who would nap you know they tended to
actually nap even some of them in the in
the early like in the call it mid
morning like before noon um and then i
think also that's more in some in africa
um if you look at some of the old
cultural you know just sort of how you
know anthropologic type stuff um but
then also i would say in the latin
culture you know tends not to go too
late right so like you want to hit that
siesta time period not at five or six
but you know maybe a two or three right
what are some things you can't track
right now that you think would be super
meaningful if you could oh it's a great
question um i do think there's a lot of
work being done on
emotional
like tracking motions emotions there's
some work being done in st louis i
forget which university that shows using
hr and hrv mainly hrv data being able to
with some self-input be able to track
emotions i think that's pretty cool so
one one of the things that's super
interesting about
aura ring and wearables in general quite
frankly is the amount of data you must
have is is really incredible sure so
would you start associating and saying
okay these like three or four metrics
and this pattern equal anger frustration
sadness
like that kind of thing so the way you
would have to typically do that right is
you again you'd have to do it with the
gold standard first right so you would
have to get a certain amount of
participants or subjects right set up a
study where you have 50 of them and you
know get them to report certain emotions
and see if there's changes in that
physiological data that you can now
create an algorithm against and then and
then you go and you predict it on
another cohort let's say another 25
people and see if it's true like you
know hey show certain screens you know
videos and you know or audio like are
you is this causing anger
right and if we see anger on the
algorithm wow man i really think that
would be pretty extraordinary so going
back to what you were saying earlier
we've got all this data coming in and
but uh we didn't we didn't even dive
deep on this and you mentioned like the
um suicide rates are like the highest
i've ever been and all this stuff and
yeah
and you know we touch our devices 150
times a day which is once every six
minutes which is really really
terrifying and when i think about some
recent changes that i've made in my life
for
for a different reason but i'm seeing
the impact that it has on my well-being
which is really really interesting is to
shut off all alerts so that no one can
ring the doorbell when i'm trying to
have the party with my friends yeah in
the basement nice analogy and
that like being able to give people
feedback on their emotions like i'm even
thinking okay as a ceo one of the things
i think about or are my
is my team thriving totally like are is
this the right place for them yeah and
because i'm well aware that this is not
going to be the right place for every
human being
knowing that they're able to like yo
you've been
70 of your day has been spent in
frustration or anger or sadness like
that would be so usable and i think
people get so blind to where they really
are like when i think about
that my phone constantly like pinging me
it it didn't dawn on me how
um corrosive that was to my productivity
for years years so to think that i could
have had or or am currently having the
same kind of blindness to an emotion or
that my teammates are having the same
kind of blindness to their emotions yeah
like wow that would be really really
powerful
i guess we think about this internally
right and so one of the things we think
about is you know our mission statement
right so you know our our mission
statement right is to empower people to
own their potential ownership meaning
like you know what you need to do
to actually be in a peak state right and
and or you know have high potential and
what does high potential mean right it
can be you know sort of mental
productivity it can be emotional right
it can be physical right um it can also
be dietary as well and so if we think
about those states of sort of potential
or even health right these four pillars
of health mental health physical health
sleep right and and diet um you know we
want to help people achieve and figure
out what actually works for them in
those different states right in those
different areas of health and well-being
and so um i think what's interesting is
you know there's been a lot done in
activity and a lot in diet
i think the reality is
only about 10 percent of people in the
u.s work out every week
99.9 percent of people sleep every night
wait wait go back what percentage work
out every week 10
every week every week whoa yeah now
ironically it actually is those who work
out like it ends up being they end up
working out like three times plus a week
so the ones that are working out or were
actually working out pretty consistently
i didn't realize it was that bad yeah
and then um and then if you you know but
just thinking about those four things on
sort of health and well-being so there's
activity there's diet sleep and let's
call cognitive mental right um but 99.9
percent of people sleep every night and
99.9 of people have some type of emotion
or cognitive performance as well every
day right and i would say you know
trying to get people to eat a certain
way is is pretty hard from a product um
you know and i think we're going to get
there in the future that will have
better ar and vr to like make it easier
to ingest like at what you're eating
passively without typing everything in
my fitness pal um and then you know
working out too i think there's been a
lot done that was the first side of
wearables so i think like as to where
like i would love or things i would love
to be able to help measure you know
sleep
because that's sort of how you start
your day how you wake up how you feel
right is a lot built on sort of like
that 30 seconds you spend with yourself
in the morning when you're in bed
deciding to get up or not um i think
that that sort of sets the day and then
also you know your feelings whether most
of us realize it or don't anymore
because every six minutes we're
distracted um right also have an impact
on sort of how you feel and perform
throughout the day right and so i think
you know if we think about what can go
into a wearable that has an impact on
your daily life like those two areas to
us as a company are extraordinarily
interesting um i think i think emotions
is hard and it's also scary
if you start to think about if you had
that information if you were an
advertiser
think of you could design the perfect ad
for the perfect person
to have them feel seduction or arousal
right right so that gets a little scary
but now i think there'll be a ground
truth of like hey actually no this is
how i feel
you know the ben and jerry's carton of
ice cream was designed for me to finish
the whole thing in that pine right right
the sour patch kids had you know
hundreds of engineers you know figuring
out exactly how to make it feel great no
matter sort of who you are and what your
taste buds are right and so um i i think
at the same time like if you do have
this type of
this type of technology there are going
to be parties that are using it for
their own profit
but i also think at the same time this
technology is needed so people
understand that hey this is what's
happening to me wearing a continuous
glucose monitor is awesome because when
you eat that pint of ben and jerry's you
see that data and you're like holy cow i
am beyond diabetic when i eat this you
know eat that whole pint so i think
data's empowering and so can we be a
platform
that helps you connect with yourself and
the like lifestyle choices that you're
making during the day that have an
ultimate impact on how you know what
your potential is yeah what do you think
about blood monitoring have you worn a
continuous glucose yeah it's dope right
um what should people be doing now to go
out of their way to find that stuff or
should they or maybe it's lifestyle like
what what do you you wore a continuous
glucose monitor so i'm assuming that you
put some value personally in yeah blood
measurements sure um what else do you
track in your own life
man in my own life um
i there's definitely been periods in my
life when i do track what i eat
my body composition my weight
just as someone who gained a lot of
weight and then wanted to lose it i
found that extremely helpful for me to
learn what was working with my body and
what wasn't um and so like i did you
know i probably tracked everything in a
spreadsheet for three years every single
meal
at one point you know and because after
banging i got up to 185 almost 190 and
then i got i got back i got down to 135.
how did you what was your protocol for
losing the fat whoo oh man a lot of
experimentation with spreadsheets um you
know did you do it all through diet or
were you working
and working out um and uh still wasn't
focused on sleep i wish i'd known more
about it because that helps a lot too um
so yeah i tried first i did keto i
probably did keto for a period of two
years straight straight straight always
increase
yeah and again something i just didn't
know at the time right that hey it might
be actually beneficial to cycle um i
probably lost the first 20 pounds doing
keto and working out but then plateaued
i actually shifted to then just like
carb cycling um so you know more or less
trying to be keto most of the time but
the days i work out really hard have
more carbs
and just moderation and caloric you know
having caloric deficit so someone just
tracking like
if you don't know and you struggle with
weight um you know like
the peter diamond is saying that he has
on on your rules right like if you don't
have a target you're guaranteed to miss
it right right so i think that that
helps blood work i think is interesting
i think as we age
you know especially like there can be
early indicators there that of long-term
health that are interesting to look at
i think sleep is like the leading
indicator um you know from everything we
know about sleep and the impact on your
hormonal stasis and mental cognition you
know as an individual like that to me
became like this is actually one of the
easiest things to track that can
actually end up not just impacting how
you sleep but your whole day the next
day so that's that's why i was super
fascinated by it and you do it every
night
right and it's it's i think it's
it's harder to think of because it's not
most people don't thinking think of it
as something that it's an active state
because it's a passive state dieting
you got to make a food decision when you
walk in that salad bar right or do you
grab the burger and fries and the soda
right so it's an active decision working
out do i do you know high intensity
workout crossfit do i do aerobic again
an active decision i think the sleep one
of the reasons why it is now becoming
popular but has taken some time to focus
on it is because most people just don't
get a just go to bed
i don't think about it i just i turn off
the lights and i lay in bed and you know
but now as more people are struggling
with it um i think now attention is
coming to how can i improve it and how
can i sleep better
but i do think sleep is a really good
leading indicator
to track and one of the easiest ones
less painful than writing spreadsheets
you don't even have to work out
you know you can just wear a device like
ours and and start to get you know
figure out some small changes that might
lead to big changes in how you feel and
perform do different types of exercise
have different effects on sleep so if
i'm just like for instance i lift i
almost never do cardio yeah
is that going to have one sort of sleep
pattern versus if i do just cardio but i
don't lift or
um so you know what the best exercise in
the world is right you tell the one
you're not doing
interesting why just because variation
matters i think well i think in terms of
just like
mechanical structures and you know
whether you're flexible or strength
right changing it up helps a lot um i i
think what we see from our data that i
can speak about is that um
later in the evening or or even just in
general having light types of workouts
mixed with heavy hard workouts again
that variation do actually help you
recover so we've even seen it with some
pro sports teams we're working with
they'll end up actually seeing that hey
you know and let's take pro football
their hrv and their sleep may be totally
terrible come come sunday night and so
when they look at on monday what we're
seeing some of the teams start to do is
alter the actual exercise protocol so
what they'll start to do is actually
let's not go super heavy on the weights
let's do some light cardio maybe 30
minutes of cardio with like some
intervals in there right
and and do a lot of stretching and
mobility work right to help open up
recover
and that actually then improves their
sleep which means they can hit it harder
on tuesday or wednesday and so i think
we've seen that in our data that these
light workouts um and specifically
probably more cardio
and and you know sort of
call it you know mobility or flexibility
you know yoga or even just foam rolling
stretching do can actually really
improve your sleep quite a bit because
it gets back into that same recovery
state that you're in yeah so recovery
that's really interesting and i've heard
you talk about how um god it was brady
and somebody else you were talking about
clocking lebron maybe i think like 10
hours or something crazy yeah something
crazy and and using the hyperbaric
chamber i mean he does interesting now
that i didn't hear so
tell people what hyperbaric oxygen is
and then tell me why yeah it's helping
me experimented much with hyperbaric so
i can't speak to that one i've seen it
being used by a couple different people
athletes um also other certain types of
individuals that are just super high
performers
super quantified cell for biohackers
where they use it for periods of time to
almost cause that stress which then
causes you to
sleep better and recover better
but yeah i think it's it's really really
interesting i think you know if you
think about it you don't get stronger in
the gym you get stronger actually out of
the gym in the gym you're actually
getting weaker right you're breaking
that muscle down right it's that
recovery process right that actually
happens it allows the muscle to grow
stronger and take a more continued load
and so i think people are sort of
messing around with different types of
stressors that might cause then greater
recovery um so i think that's why
hyperbaric chambers like as you put from
a science perspective are are really
interesting wow super interesting yeah
all right speaking of more interesting
stuff where can these guys find you
online oh uh website is auraring.com uh
just www dot uh o u r a
ring rng.com nice yeah
if people could only change one thing to
have the biggest impact on their health
what would you want them to change
um
well i would say sleep but in order to
change your sleep i think it's
you know a couple different things that
we talked about
um i do think when you just look at the
science like
i think there's a great analogy that
matthew walker had if i could give you a
pill
and this pill would improve your memory
right
help you live longer and fight off
cancer reduce your blood pressure
increase the quality of your skin and
your hair and how you look
um
you know also your testosterone
production or your muscle repair
who wouldn't want to take that pill
everyone would right and and that pill
is sleep right yet
45 of us get less than six hours a night
and
yeah and so it's it's it's sort of crazy
what's what's been happening you know i
think with modern technology and and the
change in our lifestyle as humans that
you know now we're using technology to
help bring some of that lifestyle and
consciousness back
awesome well guys sleep i i obviously
cannot recommend this one enough you can
find more information on harpreet and
everything they're doing aura ring dive
in check it out it's so powerful like
you said it's the biggest change that
you could make i really believe that if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
and until next time my friends be
legendary take care
thank you so much for coming on man
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential